---
layout: post
date: 2023-07-25
title: Choice Overload
---

We live in an age where we have a lot more choices for virtually every single thing. Think of mobile phones, to-do apps, cutlery, pens, movies, books or universities, water bottles, etc. We're living in truly enlightenened times, or are we? On more than one occasion, I've found myself struggling to choose from an endless array of things to choose from.

This is not to say that having options to choose from is a bad thing. Far from it, it enables people from different backgrounds or cultures to live a comfortable life. For instance, if we only had high-end SUVs for people to travel in, the world would be a very different and inconvenient place for a lot of us who can't afford an SUV but thankfully that's not the case, people have the option to choose, they can use the public transport(!), ride a bike or get a hatchback depending on their requirements. But at the same time, I feel like we lost something when we agreed to or rather when we started racing to provide more options for every single thing.

I'm also not implying that the previous era when we didn't have the luxury of choice offerred us better times, that's [factually](/reading/factfulness) [incorrect](/reading/enlightenment-now). The world is definitely a better place and not here trying to romanticize earlier times just because I seem to feel something is not right with our age. This essay aims to put my thoughts out there and writing this can help me figure out a way to deal with this malaise. Let's now see how having a lot many options has, in my opinion, hampered certain experiences and connections.

## Movies
It's extremely rare for me to watch movies with someone, be it family or friends, these days but I remember back when I was in 4th standard, our family used to watch movies quite often. On many occasions, cousins and neighbours would join in on a Sunday afternoon for a movie and everybody would get together and have a good time. These days, I feel people have varying choices and very rarely they'd want to sit together and watch something unless it's extremely popular and good which, in my personal experience is a rarity.

So why is it that I don't watch movies with friends and family as often as I used to back when I was a kid? I'd say it's the ease with which titles are available these days. Back in the day, only a few movies were accessible enough, either through the cinemas or through the DVD, internet was not as widespread as it is now, neither was it fast enough to allow streaming. So whenever there was a chance to see a movie, nobody would want to let it go to waste. Contrast that with today, I have every single title that is out there at the convenience of a couple clicks in my home or as some would prefer, in their pockets. Not to mention the fact that I'd rather watch a title like Like Father Like Son, than to go the theatres with a friend to watch the latest edition of Avengers, which I have no interest in. And with that, what you essentially have here is the availability of choices affecting real-life connections.

But on the flipside, it also feels good when there's that one movie that everyone is eager to watch and therefore, the novelty of watching a film in theatres with your friends and family never wears off. But it's hard to say that this compensates for everything else we _might've_ given up in order for us to have more choices in the kinds of movies we want to watch.

## Music
I vividly remember the latest popular song to come on the radio or the handful of TV music channels and everybody would go gaga over it and sing along. Here, there was a single source and you'd have to wait for the song to come up. Sometimes, it'd come up sooner and other times, it wouldn't come up at all but there was something fun about the whole process. The choices were extremely limited--in that you had little control on what would come up and there were very limited sources--so you'd enjoy almost anything that played.

Contrast that with Spotify and Apple Music, and you have so many options to choose from. There's very little incentive to not listen to something from your phone with your earphones plugged in. For instance, at the gym, rarely do I see people jamming to what's playing in the background, they are all plugged in, myself included. You can't blame anyone either, I'd rather listen to the kind of music I'm in the mood for lest I mess up my workout which would be undesirable. I was recently discussing Spotify Wrapped with some friends over dinner a couple days back and hardly anyone had any common song or artist in their top 5. Here too, there are arguments for both pros and cons here. One one side, you can see people in the subway or the gym or even in the garden, plugged in and walking among themselves potentially losing out on forming new connections. While on the other hand, such platforms prove to be a boon for upcoming artists. They are able to reach a wider audience without having to spend a fortune and hence you nowadays see so many people listening to and supporting Indie artists which is a win-win situation.


## Books
Books, I personally feel, are an anomaly here. I haven't yet had an experience where having more choices in books came out as not right, apart from the obligatory "which one to read next". [Reading](/reading) has historically been a solo activity so there's not much to lose much in the way of forming connections while engaging in the activity. Rather, once you're done with the act of reading, you can then choose to engage in sharing with or receiving recommendations from others and for what it's worth, having more options would only enhance this whole experience.

When I'm looking for what to read next, I can scrounge the internet for precisely what I'm looking for, for the most part. This is thanks to the sheer number of titles that are out there and are equally easily accessible. It's an understatement to note that I really enjoy researching about what I want to read next. But at the same time, whenever I read memoirs set in the pre-tech era, there are always references to people receiving books from friends or families and enjoying them. This naturally got me thinking whether I'd also enjoy reading whatever I can get my hands on without doing any prior research on the exact topic? I'm not particularly inclined to try this out because I enjoy the current state of things unless of course something completely new comes out to change the way we approach reading as an activity.

## Restaurants
So freaking hard to decide on what you want to eat and once you decide that, you're caught up in a never ending mire of where to eat. This is more pronounced when you're ordering in because there the options open up more.
When choosing for a place to eat out, there are usually tangible restrictions abound such as the distance or whether the place has availability, do you have to take reservations. Then you need to think about the weather, the transportation and after clearing all these hurdles, you reach your destination to enjoy your meal.
Whereas while ordering in, all you need to do is to _choose_. You have a a myriad of options and there are no physical restrictions attached to them, you can order anything you want as long as it's there on the screen. This makes it all the more difficult.

## Gifts
This is a fun one. It was so much easier to gift someone something. Limited choices made it easier to choose quickly and the likelihood of the person enjoying it was also greater. Nowadays, it's just impossible to gift someone something they'd like unless or until they had given you a list beforehand.
I thought one day about how I would like to receive a gift while I was wondering what to gift someone. I realized how with all the shopping options available online these days, I'd much rather prefer a gift card so that I can buy something I'll use (I like to consider myself a utilitarian) rather than receiving a perfume for the umpteenth time.
But..I still have to ask someone which gift card they'd like to have which is still one hop more than I'd have preferred. But usually they are receptive to the idea of a gift card and sooner or later they share what they'd like to have.
